Subclassing bot (#702)
discord-python/site: pydis_site/apps/content/resources/guides/python-guides/subclassing_bot.md

---

## Basic Subclassing
First,  a [basic article](https://www.codesdope.com/course/python-subclass-of-a-class/) on subclassing will provide some fundamental knowledge, which is highly suggested before moving on to this topic, as subclassing [Bot](https://discordpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ext/commands/api.html#discord.ext.commands.Bot) can ultimately be a complicated task.

## The benefits of subclassing bot
Subclassing Bot can be very beneficial as it provides you with more control and customisability of how your bot functions, also allowing you to add extra features, such as custom bot attributes or methods. For example, the default [Context](https://discordpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ext/commands/api.html#discord.ext.commands.Context) can be overriden to add more functionality.

There are two ways to subclass `commands.Bot`, as shown below:
```py
class CustomBot(commands.Bot):
    def __init__(self):
        super().__init__(
            command_prefix = # your prefix here as a string
            intents = # your intents here
            # other kwargs can be put here
        )
        # custom bot attributes can be set here, for example:

>         self.db = self.loop.run_until_complete(aiosqlite.connect("Your database file name"))

Reviewer: I don't think we should encourage this as there are better ways to initialize a database connection. We could show how you can override the `start()` coroutine, which would be the entry point for the bot

---
title: Subclassing Bot

> description: "Subclassing the discord.py Bot class to add more functionality and customisability."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: "Subclassing the discord.py `Bot` class to add more functionality and customizability."
```

---

## Basic Subclassing
First, a [basic article](https://www.codesdope.com/course/python-subclass-of-a-class/) on subclassing will provide some fundamental knowledge, which is highly suggested before moving on to this topic, as subclassing [`Bot`](https://discordpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ext/commands/api.html#discord.ext.commands.Bot) can ultimately be a complicated task.

> ## The benefits of subclassing bot

Reviewer 2: We should remain consistent with the titles, so let's capitalize these.

> Subclassing Bot can be very beneficial as it provides you with more control and customisability of how your bot functions, also allowing you to add extra features, such as custom bot attributes or methods. For example, the default [Context](https://discordpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ext/commands/api.html#discord.ext.commands.Context) can be overriden to add more functionality.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Subclassing `Bot` can be very beneficial as it provides you with more control and customizability of how your bot functions, also allowing you to add extra features, such as custom bot attributes or methods. For example, the default [Context](https://discordpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ext/commands/api.html#discord.ext.commands.Context) can be overridden to add more functionality.
```

> Subclassing `Bot` can be very beneficial as it provides you with more control and customizability of how your bot functions, also allowing you to add extra features, such as custom bot attributes or methods. For example, the default [Context](https://discordpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ext/commands/api.html#discord.ext.commands.Context) can be overridden to add more functionality.

Reviewer 2: One last comment (Sorry, I completely missed this)

It would be nice to reference our guide that talks about subclassing context here.

```suggestion
Subclassing `Bot` can be very beneficial as it provides you with more control and customizability of how your bot functions, also allowing you to add extra features, such as custom bot attributes or methods. For example, the default [Context](https://discordpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ext/commands/api.html#discord.ext.commands.Context) can be [overridden](../discordpy-subclassing-context.md) to add more functionality.
```

You can subclass `commands.Bot` as shown below:
```python
class CustomBot(commands.Bot):
    def __init__(self, *args, **kwargs) -> None:
        # Forward all arguments, and keyword-only arguments to commands.Bot
        super().__init__(*args, **kwargs)

        # Custom bot attributes can be set here.
        self.launch_time = datetime.datetime.utcnow()
        self.example_integer = 5

    # Here you are overriding the default start method and write your own code.
    async def start(self, *args, **kwargs) -> None:
        """Establish a database connection."""
        self.db = await aiosqlite.connect('sqlite.db')
        await super().start(*args, **kwargs)

    # Example of a custom bot method

>     def status(self) -> str:

Reviewer 2: status can be confused with the status (activity ) that a bot displays, wdyt of `launch_time`, or something in that fashion?

        """Get bot launch time in UTC and status."""
        return f"Bot started at {self.launch_time}, running."

# All arguments as passed to commands.Bot can be passed here.
bot = CustomBot(
    command_prefix="!",  # Prefix can be set to any string.
    # Discord intents, refer to https://discordpy.readthedocs.io/en/stable/intents.html
    intents=discord.Intents.default()  
)

# Example bot command
@bot.command()
async def ping(ctx):
    """
    Creates a command with the name `ping`.

    When invoked, sends `pong`.
    """

>     await ctx.send("pong")

Reviewer 2: It would be nice to display a use of your `launch_time` custom method here.
So the command's purpose can be to fetch the startup time, which will highlight better the benefit of adding such methods.

# Having the token as an environment variable is recommended.
# Refer to https://www.pythondiscord.com/pages/guides/python-guides/keeping-tokens-safe/
token = YOUR_TOKEN_HERE
bot.run(token)
```

> With the above example, you are not required to change any of the existing or future code, it is identical to code done without subclassing bot.

Reviewer 2: This is not **entirely** true, as you'll need to update the instantiation of the bot :P

Reviewer 3: oh right, this was there with the previous commits. I will change that. Maybe I should also talk abouts cogs and link it as it could be the next step?

Reviewer 2: A small comment about that wouldn't hurt, yeah.

> The next step would be to look into discord.py cogs as they help in organizing of collection of commands into various files and folders. Refer to https://discordpy.readthedocs.io/en/stable/ext/commands/cogs.html for more on cogs. Here is an example of cogs https://gist.github.com/EvieePy/d78c061a4798ae81be9825468fe146be (*Credit to EvieePy*).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The next step would be to look into discord.py cogs as they help in organizing collections of commands into various files and folders. Refer to [the official docs](https://discordpy.readthedocs.io/en/stable/ext/commands/cogs.html) for more on them.
```

I don't think there's a need for the second example as the official docs do offer that IIRC.

Plus, we'll be removing it once we've made out own version :P

---
title: Subclassing Bot

> description: "Subclassing the Bot to add more functionality and customisability."

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
description: "Subclassing the discord.py Bot class to add more functionality and customisability."
```

> description: "Subclassing the Bot to add more functionability and customisability."

Reviewer 5: Typo
```suggestion
description: "Subclassing the Bot to add more functionality and customisability."
```

---

## Basic Subclassing

> First,  a [basic article](https://www.codesdope.com/course/python-subclass-of-a-class/) on subclassing will provide some fundamental knowledge, which is highly suggested before moving on to this topic, as subclassing [Bot](https://discordpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ext/commands/api.html#discord.ext.commands.Bot) can ultimately be a complicated task.

Reviewer 4: This has the same issue as I commented about in your last PR. there is a double-space here.

> First,  a [basic article](https://www.codesdope.com/course/python-subclass-of-a-class/) on subclassing will provide some fundamental knowledge, which is highly suggested before moving on to this topic, as subclassing [Bot](https://discordpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ext/commands/api.html#discord.ext.commands.Bot) can ultimately be a complicated task.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
First,  a [basic article](https://www.codesdope.com/course/python-subclass-of-a-class/) on subclassing will provide some fundamental knowledge, which is highly suggested before moving on to this topic, as subclassing [`Bot`](https://discordpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ext/commands/api.html#discord.ext.commands.Bot) can ultimately be a complicated task.
```

## The benefits of subclassing bot

> Subclassing Bot can be very beneficial as it provides you with more control and customisability of how your bot functions, also allowing you to add extra features, such as custom bot attributes or methods. For example, the default [Context](https://discordpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ext/commands/api.html#discord.ext.commands.Context) can be overriden to add more functionality.

Reviewer 4: Can you make `Bot` and `Context` render like this with code-lines?

> There are two ways to subclass `commands.Bot`, as shown below:

Reviewer 4: I don't think I understand this, you subclass them the same way?

I think what you're talking about here is which "style" it is (depending on how you call `super().__init__()`).

It is very confusing too, because the two subclasses do different things. Does someone have to subclass the bot in a special way to be able to define `start`?

Reviewer 4: Additionally, the codeblocks should be optional. Not everyone (especially those who this guide is targeted to) can read code very fluently so we should explain what is happening and what they should divert their attention towards.

> ```py

Reviewer 4: Can we use the full language? (`python` not `py`)

class CustomBot(commands.Bot):
    def __init__(self):
        super().__init__(
            command_prefix= # Your prefix here as a string

>             intents= # Your intents here

Reviewer 4: Can you fill in the values as `...` and use two spaces before the comment?

>             command_prefix = #your prefix here as a string
>             intents = #your intents here

Reviewer 5: To keep consistent with other code examples
```suggestion
            command_prefix=#your prefix here as a string
            intents=#your intents here
```

>             #other kwargs can be put here

Reviewer 5: consistency with other comments
```suggestion
            # other kwargs can be put here
```

        )

>         #custom bot attributes can be set here, for example:

Reviewer 5: consistency with other comments
```suggestion
        # custom bot attributes can be set here, for example:
```

>         # custom bot attributes can be set here, for example:

Reviewer 4: Can you capitalize this comment like you did with the other ones?

*Note: there's other comments that also need capitalization, please capitalize all of them*

        self.launch_time = datetime.datetime.utcnow()
        self.example_integer = 5

    async def start(self, *args, **kwargs):
    # here you are overriding the default start method. You can do some code here for example establish a database connection

>     #as shown in this example below

Reviewer 5: see comment above
```suggestion
    # as shown in this example below
```

    self.db = await aiosqlite.connect('database file name.db')

>         await super().start(*args, **kwargs)

Reviewer 4: This indentation is off, all codeblocks - unless explicitly not meant to work - should be valid code and be able to run.

bot = CustomBot()
token = YOUR_TOKEN_HERE
bot.run(token)
```

> Or

Reviewer 4: This will be rendered on its very own line, can you make it a little less awkward?

For example, you can say like "Alternatively, you can also <insert explanation of codeblock>".

```py
class CustomBot(commands.Bot):

>     def __init__(self, *args, **kwargs): #the key-word arguments are not specified here, unlike the example above

Reviewer 5: see comment above
```suggestion
    def __init__(self, *args, **kwargs): # the key-word arguments are not specified here, unlike the example above
```

>         super().__init__(*args, **kwargs)

Reviewer 4: I find this empty line pointless - but it after `super().__init__()` instead - and I think you should very quickly mention what happens.

For example, a sufficient explanation could look like this:
> Forward all arguments, and keyword-only arguments to commands.Bot

>         #custom bot attributes can be set here, for example:

Reviewer 5: see comment above
```suggestion
        # custom bot attributes can be set here, for example:
```

        self.example_string = 'This is an example!'

>     #You can add a custom bot method, anyhting can be done in this function. This is an example:

Reviewer 5: see comment above
```suggestion
    # You can add a custom bot method, anyhting can be done in this function. This is an example:
```

    def hello(self):

>             return 'Hello World'

Reviewer 4: This indentation is also wrong

> #Here you set the *args and **kwargs

Reviewer 5: see comment above

 ```suggestion
# Here you set the *args and **kwargs
```

> # Here you set the *args and **kwargs

Reviewer 4: I don't think most understand this, instead you can make it clear that all arguments and keyword-arguments they can pass is exactly the same as `commands.Bot`:

> Here you pass all arguments to commands.Bot as usual

bot = CustomBot(command_prefix="!", intents=discord.Intents.default())

> @bot.command()

Reviewer 4: There should be two empty lines before this one.

async def example(ctx):
    print(bot.hello())

>     # In this case, this will print Hello World!

Reviewer 4: I'd rather have this comment on the same line, or above it.

```

> With either of the above examples, you are not required to change any of the existing or future code, it is identical to code done without subclassing bot.

Reviewer 4: Which code is this referring to? With the first option, you have to change the instantiation.

> To access the custom bot attributes set in the subclass, in the main bot file (in the context of the above example), `bot.variable_name` would be used, and as for cogs, it would be `self.bot.variable_name`. For the custom methods set, in the main file it would be `bot.custom_method()` in the main file and `self.bot.custom_method()` in a cog file.

Reviewer 4: This sentence is very long and talks about multiple things at the same time. I think it can be omitted though, because it is no special to how the user should usually access the bot.
